How to Build a DAO on the Fuel Blockchain+CB (#13)
fuel-champions/technical-writing-bounty: drafts/build_a_dao_on_fuel/draft.md

[note]: <> ("note to self and file editor, there are specific comments left throughout this file, for the sake of understanding the author's reason for using a particular method of approach; please feel free to delete once acknowledged or reply edit with a better approach 🥂")

# How to Build a DAO on the Fuel blockchain.

## Introduction

> A Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) is considered an essential blockchain application.

Reviewer: Please make sure to always capitalize DAO throughout the article. I've seen a few places where it's written "dao", a quick search and replace should fix that! :)

Author: Done 
Thanks for clearing this out.
I've a;so changed all "dao" to "DAO"

> It is a decentralized application that users or organizations use to automate the governance execution of their projects and communities. The automated program is represented by rules encoded in a network of computers that is transparently controlled by the organization members and not influenced by any central authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a decentralized application that users or organizations use to automate the governance of their projects and communities. The automated program is represented by rules encoded in a network of computers that is transparently controlled by the organization members and not influenced by any central authority.
```

By completing this article, you will learn how to create a Dao contract on the Fuel blockchain. You will also gain knowledge about the following concepts:

1. Writing a smart contract using the sway language.

> 2. Understanding how to use low-level code fundamentals in sway `asm`, `call`, etc.

Reviewer: Make sure "Sway" is always capitalized, i.e. "Sway" not sway

Author: Thanks a lot, I've made all changes in the recent commit

3. Wallet configuration

> 4. How to compile and deploy to the Fuel blockchain (testnet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. How to compile and deploy to the Fuel blockchain.
```

## Prerequisites

> To follow this tutorial seamlessly, you must have the following checked out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow this tutorial seamlessly, you should be familiar with the following:
```

> 1. [Installation](https://docs.fuel.network/guides/installation/) of dependencies like `fuel`, `sway` extensions on vscode, `rustc`, `cargo`, `rustup` `cargo-generate`, on your pc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Installation](https://docs.fuel.network/guides/installation/) of dependencies like `fuel`, `sway` extensions on vscode, `rustc`, `cargo`, `rustup` `cargo-generate`, on your machine.
```

2. Node version ^18.18.2 || ^20.0.0.
3. You should have `wsl` installed if you are using a Windows or Mac PC. You can use the code `wsl --install` to install `wsl`.

> 4. Knowledge of FuelVM and other Fuel tools.

Reviewer: I don't think this one is actually a required pre-req to follow this tutorial. Your tutorial is introducing them to the tools, and knowing the inner workings of the VM won't make this tutorial any easier or simpler to follow.

Author: Done
I've made the final requested changes,

Reviewer 2: Just confirming, Is this supposed to be removed?

5. Basic concept of blockchain technology.
6. Writing, compiling, and deploying to any blockchain (EVM or non-EVM compatible blockchain).

> 7. Understand concepts of ABIs, Faucets, and wallet connect.

Reviewer: Please link to the docs reference for each of these, i.e.

```suggestion
7. Understand concepts of [ABIs](https://docs.fuel.network/guides/quickstart/building-a-smart-contract/#abi), Faucets, and wallet connect.
```

## Getting Started

> Before you delve into the main topic, here are some concepts to jug your memory on the Fuel ecosystem and help you better understand words you will see throughout this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you delve into the main topic, here are some concepts on the Fuel ecosystem to help you better understand terms you will see throughout this tutorial.
```

**Fuel**: [Fuel](https://fuel.network/) is an operating system purpose-built for Ethereum rollups, designed to help developers build decentralized economies at scale.

**FuelVM**: The [Fuel Virtual Machine](https://medium.com/blockchain-capital-blog/exploring-the-fuelvm-86cf9ccdc159) responsible for managing all code execution on the Fuel blockchain

**Sway**: [Sway](https://fuellabs.github.io/sway/) is a domain-specific language for writing smart contracts on the Fuel blockchain.

**ABI**: These are called [Application Binary Interfaces](https://docs.fuel.network/guides/intro-to-sway/contract-abi/); they are the blueprint or interaction models of your smart contract, it is a layout of the detailed functionalities in your smart contract, and how to interact with it.

## Setting up your Environment

In the next few steps, you will set up your development environment to begin building the smart contract of your Dao.

1. Go to your terminal and run the command `wsl` to start your wsl terminal if you are using a Windows

> 2. Next, run the commands below to generate your new contract directory and fuel development workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run the commands below in your terminal to generate your new contract directory and Fuel development workspace. (If you have previously not installed the Fuel toolchain, first run `curl https://install.fuel.network | sh` in your terminal.)
```

mod errors;
mod events;
mod interface;
mod utils;

// Import event types related to various actions within the DAO
use ::events::{
    CreateProposalEvent,
    DepositEvent,
    ExecuteEvent,
    InitializeEvent,
    UnlockVotesEvent,
    VoteEvent,
    WithdrawEvent,
};

// Import interfaces for DAO voting and information retrieval
use ::interface::{DaoVoting, Info};

// Import utility function for validating IDs
use ::utils::validate_id;
```
All of these are libraries you will be creating later in this tutorial. 

- `error`: define the error handlers for your contract.
- `data_structure`: defines functionalities for managing proposals and voting and defines methods for initializing your DAO.
- `events` defines a library of multiple `structs` that emit events when certain instances or functions are executed on-chain.
- `utils`: These will be instances emitted on-chain when certain events are met.
- `interface`: this is where you will implement your contract ABIs

### 3. Initializing Storage Variables

Next, you will initialize a set of persistent [storage](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/blockchain-development/storage/#storage) needed throughout your contract.

> ***Note: Storage initialization is one of the similar patterns in [solidity](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/intro/what-is-fuel/#rust--solidity--sway) that sway supports as well.***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Note: Storage initialization is one of the similar patterns in [Solidity](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/intro/what-is-fuel/#rust--solidity--sway) that Sway supports as well.***
```

This contract initializes the storage with the keyword `storage{}` and has a list of the variables and their storage types. To read or write to the storage type respectfully, use the `storage` keyword and `.try_read()` or `.write()`.
Follow the [guide](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/common-collections/storage_map) to know more about managing storage maps and their types. 

- `balances`: This variable stores an object mapping the user's identity (address) to the total amount of deposited tokens `64-unsigned int` they have your Dao contract.

- `proposals`: This storage maps a `64-unsigned int` to a new proposal information `struct`, keeping track of every new proposal in your Dao that a user makes on the Dao contract.

- `proposal_count`: This defines a simple `64 unsigned int` that tracks the total number of proposals created uniquely in your Dao.

- `state`: This defines a state variable that tracks the contract's state and is set to `NotInitialized` by default.

> - `asset`: This variable stores the contract ID of a governance asset. This asset i  regardd as the only acceptable asset used in the Dao contract, If a user try's to interact with the Dao using any other asset aside the one initialized with the contract, the event is rejected.

Reviewer: Some typos here.

Author: Thanks @hummusonrails. Changes Made
> `asset`: This variable stores the contract ID of a governance asset. This asset is regarded as the only acceptable asset used in the DAO contract; if a user tries to interact with the DAO using an asset other than the one initialized with the contract, the event is rejected.

If no error is emitted, it constructs a `ProposalInfo` object and inserts it into the storage, incrementing the proposal count. Finally, it logs a `CreateProposalEvent` to record the proposal's creation. The function does not require a token amount to be deposited when creating a new proposal.

Copy and paste the code below using your `create_proposal` function.

```rust
  #[storage(read, write)]
  fn create_proposal(
    acceptance_percentage: u64,
    duration: u64,
    proposal_transaction: Proposal,
  ) {
    require(0 < duration, CreationError::DurationCannotBeZero);
    require(
      0 < acceptance_percentage && acceptance_percentage <= 100,
      CreationError::InvalidAcceptancePercentage,
    );

    let author = msg_sender().unwrap();
    let proposal = ProposalInfo::new(
      acceptance_percentage,
      author,
      duration,
      proposal_transaction,
    );
    storage
      .proposals
      .insert(storage.proposal_count.read(), proposal);
    storage
      .proposal_count
      .write(storage.proposal_count.read() + 1);

    log(CreateProposalEvent {
      proposal_info: proposal,
      id: storage.proposal_count.read() - 1,
    });
  }
```

> Note: You will notice similar convention to writing a rust smart contract when creating a new function with `fn` or importing modules with `mod`. Here is a better read on the [similarities](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/intro/what-is-fuel/#rust--solidity--sway) and [differences](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/reference/rust_differences/#differences-from-rust) between sway and rust. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: You will notice similar convention to writing a Rust smart contract when creating a new function with `fn` or importing modules with `mod`. Here is a better read on the [similarities](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/intro/what-is-fuel/#rust--solidity--sway) and [differences](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/reference/rust_differences/#differences-from-rust) between Sway and Rust. 
```

    require(
        proposal.deadline < height().as_u64(),
        ProposalError::ProposalStillActive,
    );

    // Calculate the acceptance percentage of the proposal based on yes and no votes
    let acceptance_percentage = proposal.yes_votes * 100 / (proposal.yes_votes + proposal.no_votes);
    
    // Ensure that the acceptance percentage meets the required threshold for execution
    require(
        proposal.acceptance_percentage <= acceptance_percentage,
        ProposalError::InsufficientApprovals,
    );

    // Mark the proposal as executed
    proposal.executed = true;
    storage.proposals.insert(proposal_id, proposal);

    // Execute the proposal transaction using assembly code
    asm(
        call_data: proposal.proposal_transaction.call_data,
        amount: proposal.proposal_transaction.amount,
        asset: proposal.proposal_transaction.asset,
        gas: proposal.proposal_transaction.gas,
    ) {
        call call_data amount asset gas;
    }

    // Log an event indicating that the proposal has been executed
    log(ExecuteEvent {
        user: msg_sender().unwrap(),
        acceptance_percentage,
        id: proposal_id,
    })
}

```

> ***Note:In sway, the [assembly](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/advanced/assembly/#asm-block) keyword `asm` is used to create an assemly inline block, declaring an `asm` block is similar to declaring a function but in low-level code, in this function the block executes the proposal's transaction. It allows for more flexibility and control over the execution process, enabling interactions that may not be possible using higher-level code alone***.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Note:In Sway, the [assembly](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/advanced/assembly/#asm-block) keyword `asm` is used to create an assembly inline block, declaring an `asm` block is similar to declaring a function but in low-level code, in this function the block executes the proposal's transaction. It allows for more flexibility and control over the execution process, enabling interactions that may not be possible using higher-level code alone***.
```

When a proposal is executed, the assembly block extracts the necessary information from the proposal's transaction `call_data`, `amount`, `asset`, and `gas` and executes the transaction using these parameters. This allows the contract to perform the proposed action, such as transferring assets or invoking another contract function.

```rust
    asm(
      call_data: proposal.proposal_transaction.call_data,
      amount: proposal.proposal_transaction.amount,
      asset: proposal.proposal_transaction.asset,
      gas: proposal.proposal_transaction.gas,
    ) {
      call call_data amount asset gas;
    }
```

**Note: The [`call`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/fuels-ts/contracts/methods/#call) keyword also used in the assmbly code block is  used to submit a real contract call transaction to the node. Here is a more in-depth read on the [call method](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/fuels-ts/contracts/methods/#call) and [call parameters](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/fuels-ts/contracts/call-parameters/)**

> ### Unlocking all Votes

Reviewer: Consistent capitalization of section headers is important. Use this resource to help you on that: https://capitalizemytitle.com/

Author: This was helpful, thanks Ben
I've modified all headers (titles) appropriately

> This function unlocks the votes of a memeber once a proposal's voting period has elapsed. Through its execution, members can regain their voting power, ensuring a fair and transparent democratic process within the Dao's ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function unlocks the votes of a member once a proposal's voting period has elapsed. Through its execution, members can regain their voting power, ensuring a fair and transparent democratic process within the Dao's ecosystem.
```

    require(
        proposal.deadline < height().as_u64(),
        ProposalError::ProposalStillActive,
    );

    // Identify the user who initiated the function call
    let user = msg_sender().unwrap();
    
    // Retrieve the user's votes for the proposal from storage or create default if not present
    let votes = storage.votes.get((user, proposal_id)).try_read().unwrap_or(Votes::default());

    // Initialize or update the user's votes for the proposal in storage
    storage.votes.insert((user, proposal_id), Votes::default());

    // Calculate the total vote amount by summing up yes and no votes
    let vote_amount = votes.yes_votes + votes.no_votes;

    // Update the user's balance in storage by adding the vote amount
    storage
        .balances
        .insert(
            user,
            storage
                .balances
                .get(user)
                .try_read()
                .unwrap_or(0) + vote_amount,
        );

    // Log an event indicating that votes have been unlocked for the proposal by the user
    log(UnlockVotesEvent {
        id: proposal_id,
        user,
        vote_amount,
    });
}
```

### 6. Creating the Info Contract

> You will create an' Info' contract on your `main.sw` file to serve as your `abi`. Each function provides information about the State of the Dao contract, including `balances`, `votes`, and `proposals`. It defines how external smart contracts can query the status and details of your Dao Contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will create an `Info` contract on your `main.sw` file to serve as your `abi`. Each function provides information about the State of the Dao contract, including `balances`, `votes`, and `proposals`. It defines how external smart contracts can query the status and details of your Dao Contract.
```

  }
}

impl Info for Contract {
  #[storage(read)]
  fn balance() -> u64 {
    this_balance(storage.asset.read())
  }

  #[storage(read)]
  fn user_balance(user: Identity) -> u64 {
    storage.balances.get(user).try_read().unwrap_or(0)
  }

  #[storage(read)]
  fn user_votes(proposal_id: u64, user: Identity) -> Votes {
    validate_id(proposal_id, storage.proposal_count.read());
    storage.votes.get((user, proposal_id)).try_read().unwrap_or(Votes::default())
  }

  #[storage(read)]
  fn proposal(proposal_id: u64) -> ProposalInfo {
    validate_id(proposal_id, storage.proposal_count.read());
    storage.proposals.get(proposal_id).try_read().unwrap()
  }

  #[storage(read)]
  fn governance_asset_id() -> AssetId {
    require(
      storage
        .state
        .read() == State::Initialized,
      InitializationError::ContractNotInitialized,
    );
    storage.asset.read()
  }

  #[storage(read)]
  fn proposal_count() -> u64 {
    storage.proposal_count.read()
  }
}
```

Now that you have completed implementing your main contract, let's return to the other contract types you imported earlier. You will complete the next steps by creating those contracts.

### The Library Contracts

> Three sway contracts can be deployed on Fuel by three main [types](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/). [`Contracts`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/smart_contracts/), [`Libraries`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/libraries/), [`Scripts`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/scripts/), and [`Predicates`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/predicates/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three Sway program [types](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/) can be deployed on Fuel: [`Contracts`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/smart_contracts/), [`Libraries`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/libraries/), [`Scripts`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/scripts/), and [`Predicates`](https://docs.fuel.network/docs/sway/sway-program-types/predicates/).
```

You will write the contract libraries you imported earlier in the next few steps.

## 1. Creating the Contract Files
Run the commands in your contract directory to create the files for the new library contracts.

```bash
$ cd src

> $ mkdir errors.sw data_structires.sw events.sw interface.sw utils.sw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ mkdir errors.sw data_structures.sw events.sw interface.sw utils.sw
```

- `ProposalStillActive` is an error indicating that a proposal is still active and cannot be executed until it expires.

```rust
  pub enum ProposalError {
    InsufficientApprovals: (),
    ProposalExecuted: (),
    ProposalExpired: (),
    ProposalStillActive: (),
  }
```

### The User's Error
The last error, `UserError`, has five variants:

- The `AmountCannotBeZero` error indicates that the amount specified by the user is zero, which is not allowed for the operation being performed.
- The `IncorrectAssetSent` error indicates that the asset sent by the user does not match the expected asset for the contract.
The `InsufficientBalance` error indicates that the user has insufficient balance to operate.
- The `InvalidId` error indicates that the provided ID is invalid or does not exist.
- The `VoteAmountCannotBeZero` error indicates that the vote amount specified by the user is zero, which is not allowed for voting operations.
  ```rust
  pub enum UserError {
    AmountCannotBeZero: (),
    IncorrectAssetSent: (),
    InsufficientBalance: (),
    InvalidId: (),
    VoteAmountCannotBeZero: (),
  }
  ```

## 3. The Data Structure Library

>  Next, go to your `data_structures.sw` file to implement a new library contract that defines the data structures and associated functions to manage proposals and votes within a voting system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Next, go to your `data_structures.sw` file to implement a new library that defines the data structures and associated functions to manage proposals and votes within a voting system. 
```

}

/// Represents an event emitted when a user votes on a proposal.
pub struct VoteEvent {
  id: u64, // Identifier of the proposal voted on
  user: Identity, // User who voted
  vote_amount: u64, // Amount of votes cast
}

/// Represents an event emitted when a user withdraws assets from the contract.
pub struct WithdrawEvent {
  amount: u64, // Amount of assets withdrawn
  user: Identity, // User who made the withdrawal
}

```

## 6. The Utils Library 
Finally, go to your `utils.sw` contract file. This library provides a function called `validate_id` that validates whether a given ID is within a specified count range.

Copy and paste the code below into your `utils.sw` file.

```rust
library;

use ::errors::UserError;

/// Validates if the given ID is within the valid range.
pub fn validate_id(id: u64, count: u64) {
  require(id < count, UserError::InvalidId); // Ensure ID is less than the count
}
```

### Compiling your Smart Contract

First, ensure you are in your contract directory, and run the command `forc build`. You should get a response similar to the one in the image below.

![forc_build](./images/forc_compile.png)

## Deploying your smart contract

> Following the next few steps, you will deploy your contract to the Fuel `beta-4` testnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the next few steps, you will deploy your contract to the Fuel `beta-5` testnet.
```

Assuming you already have your developer wallet configured locally and that your wallet details, including your password, are safely stored. If not, follow the steps [here](https://github.com/FuelLabs/forc-wallet) or watch [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YiNRgaQvoqo).

> 1. First, you need to get your test faucets to deploy and make transactions on your contract. Head over to the site to get your faucets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First, you need to get your test faucet coins to deploy and make transactions on your contract. Head over to the test faucet to get your tokens.
```
